DZG LECTURE
Spider senses – technical perfection and biology* * 
Friedrich G. Barth*
University of Vienna, Biocenter, Institute of Zoology, Vienna, Austria
Summary
This essay deals with sensory biology in a broad sense. It takes mechanosensory systems of spiders to illustrate a few basic issues. Par-
ticular attention is given to two aspects. 1. There is a remarkable “ingenuity” in the uptake and transformation of the adequate stimuli
way out in the sensory periphery, which is reflected by an intimate relationship between the physical properties of the stimuli  and the
characteristics of the structures receiving and transforming them. We need to understand the details of this relationship in or der to un-
derstand the relationship of an organism to its environment. 2. Sensory systems represent interfaces between the environment and be-
havior. As highly selective filters they have not evolved to provide abstract knowledge but to guide a particular behavior. The  signals
sent to the central nervous system are meaningful only in regard to their behavioral significance. – Some details of stimulus t ransforma-
tion in biological strain gauges (slit sensilla), airflow detectors (trichobothria) and touch receptors (tactile hairs) are described. Some of
the refinement in the periphery is then meshed with the behavior of the whole organism. In this way the value shall be underlined of try-
ing to understand reductionist details as building blocks of the complexity which enables an organism to behave in its own part icular
way in its species specific environment.
Key words : Sensory biology, neuroethology, biotechnology, mechanoreception, arthropods
animal kingdom. This of course also applies to spiders,
a large group of about 40,000 described species with re-
markable ecological success. A considerable part of
this success must be attributed to highly developed sen-
sory systems which are the result of about 400 million
years of evolution. The complex behavioral patterns
shown by spiders are unthinkable without the spiders’
armament of sensors. 
Compared to such a long evolutionary history, the
roughly 35 years of my own preoccupation with spiders
of the genus Cupiennius are just a nano-flash in time.
Yet this flash has brought to light fascinating details of
spider sensory systems and their behavioral roles and
has at the same time taught us a lot about more general
0944-2006/02/105/04-271 $ 15.00/0
No life without sensing
Sensors and sensing are fundamental properties of all
living beings, from protists and indeed bacteria to man.
Life without them is hardly possible because behavior
needs guidance by them. Neither reactions to changes
in the environment outside the organism nor to changes
in its inside would be possible. Without them, life
would not “make sense” anymore and the lost capabil-
ity of homeostasis would have fatal consequences. Sur-
vival and securing the genes for the next generation
could no longer be the fundamental achievements of
living beings. Accordingly, one finds a fascinating rich-
ness and diversity of sensory systems throughout the
*Corresponding author: Friedrich G. Barth, University of Vienna, Biocenter, Institute of Zoology, Althanstr. 14, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria; phone: +43-1-4277 54470; fax: +43-1-4277 54507; e-mail: friedrich.g.barth@univie.ac.at
**Karl Ritter von Frisch-lecture presented at the 95. Annual Meeting of the Deutsche Zoologische Gesellschaft in Halle, May 22,  2002Zoology 105(2002): 271–285
© by Urban & Fischer Verlag
http://www.urbanfischer.de/journals/zoology


Fig. 1.Cupiennius salei (Keyserling, 1877), adult female (leg
span about 10 cm). (A)Ventral view with typical black annular
patterns on the femora, broad black median stripe on the opistho-
soma and terra-cotta red hairs on the coxae (photograph kindly
provided by Raphael Barth). (B) Spider injecting venom into
a grasshopper caught on a bromeliad only seconds before the
photograph was taken (near Cordoba, Mexico; from Barth, 2001).issues in biology. It enabled us to have at least a
glimpse at the order which meshes elemental principles
of some sensory systems with the whole organism at
different levels of function, and it helped us to under-
stand at least a few reductionist details as building
blocks of the complexity which is the core of neu-
roethology. 
Cupiennius , the priceless spider 
Spiders of the genus Cupiennius mainly live in Central
America. Eugène Simon (1848–1924), the famous
French arachnologist, established the genus in 1891.
Cupiennius salei (Fig. 1), the most popular in our re-
search among the nine described species (Lachmuth
et al., 1984; Barth and Cordes, 1998), was first col-
lected by Monsieur Salé near Cordoba and Veracruz
in Mexico. Graf Eugen Wilhelm Theodor von Keyser-
ling (1832–1889) described the now lost holotype as
Ctenus salei in 1877 (Keyserling, 1877). Today,
C.saleistill can be found near Cordoba. Actually, we
did much of our field work in this area. It seems like a
nice coincidence of history that now, 125 years after
its first description in the Proceedings of the Zoolo-
gisch-Botanische Gesellschaft in Vienna, it is at
Vienna University that C. salei(and other species of
the genus) has been bred by the hundreds since 1987,
when we brought our colony with us from Frankfurt.
Among the prominent features of C. salei is its close
association with plants (mainly monocots) on which it
hides during the day in retreats in between the leaves
and preys and courts at night. Cupiennius forms a
genus of hunting or wandering spiders which do not
live in a spider web or build a web to catch prey like
the familiar orb weavers or funnel web spiders.
C.saleiis a large night active spider with a leg span of
about 10 cm, as are its close relatives C. getazi and
C.coccineus (Barth, 2001) . All of these species can
be bred in large numbers and all year round in the
laboratory far away from their homeland, which is
one of the keys to their “success” as priceless research
animals.
It remains unclear why Eugène Simon chose Cupiennius as the
name for the genus to which the spider collected by Mr. Salé in
Mexico now belongs. Most likely he was a highly educated
researcher who knew the satires (called sermones by its author) of
Quintus Horatius Flaccus, the famous Roman writer (65–8 BC).
In sermon I 2, 36 Horatius mentions Cupiennius Libo from
Cumae who is said to have been a good friend of Emperor Augus-
tus. From Pomponius Porphysio, the antique commentator of
Horatius, we learn: Gaius Cupiennius Libo Cumanus Augusti
familiaritate clarus corporis sui diligentissimus fuit sectator
matronarum concubitus. The relation between the reputation of
Cupiennius of being a voluptuous adulterer and “Matronenjäger”
and our spider remains enigmatic.Using only a few selected examples, the following
essay strives to shortly illustrate two aspects related to
the “sense of senses”. One is about the sensory periph-
ery, the other about behavior. 
(1) The uptake of the adequate stimuli very often shows
a remarkable ingenuity and efficiency and again and
again demonstrates how many clever ways nature has
found to solve “technically” difficult problems. There
272F. G. Barth 
Zoology 105(2002) 4


is a wealth of biologically applied physics and engi-
neering seen in the intimate relationship between the
properties of the stimulus and the properties of the
structures receiving and transforming it. In many cases,
knowledge of this relationship way out in the sensory
periphery substantially contributes to our understand-
ing of the relationship between an entire organism and
its species specific environment. 
(2)The second aspect to be illustrated here is as trivial
as it is important. Sensory systems and the sense they
make remain inconceivable without considering behav-
ior. On the contrary: the senses are the interfaces be-
tween the environment and behavior. The signals pro-
vided for the central nervous system by the sensors only
become information by their ethological meaning. Sen-
sory systems have evolved to permit particular behav-
iors. These have to be taken into account if we strive for
a full understanding of what the sensors have to tell the
brain.
The well “engineered” sensory periphery
Slit sensilla – biological strain gauges 
Slit sensilla (Fig. 2A) may be called biological strain
gauges. They are “embedded sensors” in engineering
terminology and closely related to a particular sensory
function of the spider exoskeleton. When the exoskele-
ton is subjected to mechanical loads from internal
sources like muscular activity or hemolymph pressure
(Fig. 2B), or from external sources like substrate vibra-
tion, the forces entail strains in the cuticle. In other
words, the cuticular material will be slightly deformed.
There are roughly 3,500 slit sensors embedded into the
exoskeleton of Cupiennius salei , mainly on the legs,
which are capable of measuring such deformations (re-
view: Barth, 2001).
These deformations are minute. This is easily under-
stood in case of fully sclerotized exocuticular material
whose modulus of elasticity (Young’s modulus; in the
order of 18 GPa, spider leg tibia) resembles that of
bone. In more practical terms that means that on the
tibia, to take an example, strains in the order of 20 µm
(ppm; under load the original length l oof a piece of ma-
terial changes by a factor of 20 ×10–6) occur during lo-
comotion and effectively stimulate spider slit sensilla,
provided they are compressional strains (negative ten-
sion) (Blickhan and Barth, 1985). The tiny slits in the
exoskeleton (width less than 2 µm, length from about 8
to 200 µm) send off action potentials, when compressed
by a few Ångström units (10–8cm) only. This remark-
able sensitivity tells us that the relationship between the
properties of the stimulus and the morphology and
position of the slits in the exoskeleton must be a very
273Spider Senses
Zoology 105(2002) 4close one. For its deeper understanding, knowledge is
needed of the size, the sign, and the course taken by the
lines (trajectories) of principal stresses under natural
stimulus conditions at the site of the sense organs. The
organs examined in this way are indeed found in areas
of compressional forces and are oriented roughly at a
right angle to them, which implies maximum mechani-
cal sensitivity (Fig. 2C; Barth and Pickelmann, 1975;
Blickhan and Barth, 1985). Considering the directional
properties of slit sensilla, the logic can be turned around
and the sign and orientation of strain trajectories pre-
dicted at a particular site from the orientation of the
slits. 
A characteristic feature of slit sensilla is their occur-
rence as compound organs, forming arrays of up to 29
slits in close parallel arrangement. The advantages
gained by such arrays over single slits seem to hide the
most advanced features of “mechanical engineering”
exhibited by the slit sensilla. This is at least partly par-
alleled by physiological refinement and differentiation
among the slits. We do not know enough yet about this,
but the exemplary examination of lyriform organs al-
ready demonstrated differences in threshold compres-
sion, a considerable enlargement of the working range,
in particular the range of high differential sensitivity,
and a remarkable influence of the detailed pattern
formed by the parallel slits on their mechanical proper-
ties (deformability by cuticular strains under load), in-
cluding their directional sensitivity (Barth and Bohnen-
berger, 1978; Bohnenberger, 1981; Barth et al., 1984;
review: Barth, 2001). One of the lyriform organs is ex-
ceptional with regard to its orientation perpendicular to
the leg’s long axis and its dorsal arrangement, bridging
a furrow in the exoskeletal cuticle distally on the
metatarsus. This nicely shows us how crucial details of
arrangement may be in a strain measuring sensory sys-
tem. The features mentioned above make this organ a
very sensitive vibration detector responding to sub-
strate vibrations down to 10–6to 10–7cm. This is the
same order of magnitude as found for the vibration de-
tectors of cockroaches (so far considered the champi-
ons), crickets, and other insects and indeed also in the
range of the “hair” deflection in the hair cells of the ver-
tebrate inner ear. The spider metatarsal vibration recep-
tor also nicely reveals, how successfully evolution dealt
with the mechanics offered by the exoskeleton for a
sensory system representing biological strain gauges. 
Trichobothria – hairs that catch the wind
A close look at the surface of a spider such as Cupien-
nius salei brings to light an astonishing finding. There
are several hundred thousands of innervated cuticular
hairs and up to about 400 such hairs per mm2(Fig. 3A).
Almost all of them are mechanically sensitive. Sensory

274F. G. Barth 
Zoology 105(2002) 4
Fig. 2. Slit sensilla . (A)Left:
Loosely arranged group of slit sen-
silla and lyriform organ (arrow) on
the trochanter of a walking leg.
Right:Lyriform or compound organ
on trochanter (after Barth 2001). (B)
The main sources of the strains in
the exoskeleton measured by the slit
sensilla are hemolymph pressure
and muscular forces. Top: Lacunae
in the tibia forming well defined
channels for the fast transport of
hemolymph during joint move-
ments. Middle: Arrangement of
flexor muscles in the spider leg tibia
(Ti); Papatella, MeMetatarsus; Fl
flexor, Prpromotor. Bottom: Ten-
sion and pressure lines in a model
tibia under quasi-natural load (simu-
lating muscular forces introduced
through the condyli during flexion
of the joint). Arrow points to lyri-
form organ HS-8 laterally on the
tibia in an area of pressure (negative
tension, broken lines). Ventral part
of distal tibia characterized by ten-
sion (continuous lines). (C)Left:
Strains at the site of lyriform organs
can be measured in vivo by attach-
ing miniature strain gauges onto the
cuticle. Right:Top, during flexion
of the metatarsus (ME) negative
strains at the lateral sites of organs
HS-8, HS-9 and VS-4 compress and
thus effectively stimulate, whereas
the ventral organ VS-5 is in an area
of positive strain and not stimulated.
During leg extension the situation
reverses. Middle and bottom, strains
at organs HS-8 and VS-5 during one
step in a freely walking spider. Dark
shading of bar above graphs indi-
cates stance phase (stimulation of
HS-8), light shading indicates swing
phase (stimulation of VS-5; after
Barth and Pickelmann, 1975; Blick-
han and Barth, 1985).

cells ending at their respective base are adequately
stimulated by the deflection of the hair shaft.
The so-called trichobothria (analogous to insect fili-
form hairs) of spiders are medium flow sensors (Fig.
3B). They respond to the slightest movement of the sur-
rounding air, as for instance produced by a potential
prey animal flying by (reviews: Barth, 2000, 2001).
Considering their mechanical sensitivity, trichobothria
represent an extreme case within the spectrum of
mechanosensitive hair sensilla. Their hair shaft is taken
along by the frictional forces exerted by the slightest air
flow. According to recent analyses, both cricket fili-
form hairs (Shimozawa et al., 2002) and spider tri-
chobothria (Humphrey et al., 2002) are the champions
among all known bio-sensors in regard to absolute sen-
sitivity. Physically exact calculations of the work driv-
ing a trichobothrium over one oscillation cycle yielded
values down to 2.5 ×10–20Ws (Joules). This value cor-
responds to a fraction of the energy contained in one
quantum of green light. For cricket filiform hairs evenvalues in the order of 10–21Ws have been determined
(Thurm, 1982; Shimozawa et al., 2002) for an oscilla-
tion cycle at 5 Hz and maximum deflection at sensory
threshold roughly corresponding to 1/100 of the energy
of a single photon. The obvious conclusion is the same
as in case of the slit sensilla: Such an exquisite sensitiv-
ity rests on an intimate interaction and coupling be-
tween the moving air and hair.
Again, much of the extremely “well engineered” pro-
cesses of stimulus uptake and transformation can be un-
derstood by interpreting them as reflections of the
physics of the stimulus. In the given case this means
that one has to consider fluid mechanics. A trichoboth-
rium can be represented by an inverted pendulum and
much of its quantitative understanding rests on Stokes’
now classical analysis of “the effect of the internal fric-
tion of fluids on the motion of pendulums” dating back
to 1851. Figure 4 left and center shows some of the key
parameters to be taken into account. Whereas the hair is
deflected by torque T(Nm), which is due to the viscous
forces of the medium flow, both S(Nm/rad) and R
(Nms/rad) oppose deflection, Srepresenting the elastic
restoring force and Rthe viscous damping. Among
other things, the mathematical modeling informs us
about the significance of the mass of the hair shaft, its
length, diameter and surface structure as determinants
of mechanical sensitivity. Thus, it turns out that the sen-
sitivity of the range of best frequencies is particularly
large with regard to hair length L. In other words: If one
was to modify or adjust the tuning in a corresponding
artificial sensor, one would primarily do this by chang-
ing L, and only secondarily by adjusting Rand S(Barth
et al., 1993; Humphrey et al., 1993, 2001). Interest-
ingly, this is what we find in the trichobothria. Typi-
cally, these form groups of hairs with lengths between
about 0.1 mm and 1.5 mm and with corresponding best
frequency ranges between about 40 Hz and 600 Hz.
Compared to an individual hair, a group of hairs just
slightly differing in length represents a set of bandpass
filters which enlarges the range of high sensitivity con-
siderably. Mathematical modeling also permits predic-
tions regarding adaptive evolution, that is to say it helps
us to understand how evolution can play the keyboard
of parameters at its disposal (Humphrey et al., 2001).
The main reason for the dependence of frequency tuning
on hair length is not primarily due to the implicit differ-
ences in mass (long hairs being more sensitive to low
frequencies and short hairs to higher ones) or in the elas-
tic restoring force. Instead, there is a special relationship
between the lowerend of the bandpass characteristics of
a trichobothrium and the boundary layer. This is a zone
of reduced medium flow velocity in the immediate
vicinity of surfaces within the flow, like the body sur-
face of the spider. Boundary layer thickness increases
275Spider Senses
Zoology 105(2002) 4Fig. 3.Hair sensilla ( C. saleifemale). (A)Ventral view of proxi-
mal leg segments; note dense cover of cuticular hairs mainly serv-
ing mechanosensory functions. (B) Tarsus of a walking leg; note
trichobothria (length up to 1.4mm) dorsally on the tarsus with
bend of distal part of their hairshaft (from Barth, 2001).


with decreasing flow frequency. According to direct
measurements with the laser anemometer, the length of
the trichobothria is in the range of boundary layer thick-
ness. Using an oscillating airflow, the thickness of the
boundary layer above the spider leg varied roughly from 
2.600 µm to 600 µm over the range of 10 Hz to 959 Hz
(Barth et al., 1993). The consequence is the following:
At low frequencies short hairs “get stuck” in the zone of
reduced particle velocity, whereas long hairs are ex-
posed to the higher velocities found at a larger distance
from the surface. The upperfrequency end of the band-
pass properties of a trichobothrium is due to the inertia
of the hair shaft and of the virtual mass moved along
with it. The moment of inertia increases by a factor of
103 with hair length and the hair becomes increasingly
immobile with increasing frequency.
Tactile hairs – not just rigid pencils
The large majority of the numerous cuticular hairs cov-
ering the spider exoskeleton does not serve the detec-
tion of air movement. Instead, most of the hairs are tac-
tile hairs, contrasting the trichobothria and nicely illus-
trating the potential contained in the seemingly simple
“Bauplan” of an arthropod sensory hair. 
When deflected by the viscous forces of the air flow
around them, trichobothria do not bend. The main rea-son for this is the extremely low elastic restoring force
at their articulation. In trichobothria spring stiffness S
is of the order of 10–12Nm/rad. As a result, the forces
acting on flow sensors are too small to bend the hair
shaft to any relevant degree. The hair parameters domi-
nating the mechanical behavior are mass Mand tor-
sional inertia I(Fig. 4 center). In the tactile hairs exam-
ined by us, the situation is radically different due to a
difference in a few parameters only. In tactile hairs
spring stiffness Smeasures about 10–8Nm/rad. It is
larger by about four powers of ten than in case of the
flow sensors. Due to the forces needed to overcome
this stiffness, the hair is not only deflected but also bent
by the stimulus (Fig. 4 right). As a consequence,
Young’s modulus Eand the second moment of area J
along length Lof the hair shaft are the mechanically
dominant features (whereas Mand Imay be neglected
due to the relative size of the stimulating force; Barth
and Dechant, 2002).
In most cases of the touch receptors we examined stim-
ulation will be from above. When touched by an object
from above, the hair shaft is pushed down and bent. It
turns out that the hair shaft is a surprisingly “clever”
stimulus transmitting structure. The point of load intro-
duction increasingly shifts towards the hair base with
increasing load and deflection. Accordingly, the effec-
tive lever arm and the stimulating moment decrease
276F. G. Barth 
Zoology 105(2002) 4
Fig. 4.Arthropod mechanosensory hair sensilla.Left: Schematic representation of parameters to be considered; Llength and ddiameter
of hairshaft, Rfrictional resistance and Storsional restoring constant or spring stiffness of articulation. Center:Hair sensitive to airflow
like trichobothrium or insect filiform hair. Deflection ( Θ) is by viscous forces ( T, torque). Sis very small and as a consequence the hair-
shaft is not bent by the stimulus. Right:In spider tactile hairs the articulation is much stiffer than in trichobothria, with values of Slarger
by about four powers of ten. Thus a tactile hair is both deflected and bent by the stimulus (from above). The hair parameters mainly to
be considered in order to understand hair mechanics are mass Mand its torsional inertia Iin case of the flow sensors and Young’s mod-
ulus Eand the second moment of area Jalong the length Lof the hairshaft in case of tactile hairs (after Barth and Dechant, 2002).

Fig. 5.Bending of a spider tactile
hair by mechanical stimulation from
above. Above: With increasing load
(see force vectors, which are not
drawn to scale) and hair deflection
the effective lever arm represented
by the hairshaft shortens. Below:
According to finite element simula-
tion and following microscopical
observation of the hair’s bending
behavior the bending moment in-
creases more slowly with increasing
load (see red curve). The dotted
green line shows how much faster
the moment would increase in case
of a hair not bending under load
(constant lever arm; after Dechant
etal., 2001).
with increasing loading force. The largest bending mo-
ment equals only about 20% of that to be expected for a
rigid hair (Fig. 5). Remarkably, due to its bending, the
hair shaft never is deflected by more than about 12° at
its base. Similarly, the bending moment increases much
more slowly with large loading forces than with small
ones and reaches saturation at about 4 ×10–9Nm. What
does that mean in more practical terms? First, the hair
is protected against breaking. S econd, the hair’s me-
chanical working range is considerably extended as
compared to a rigid hair. Third, the mechanical sensitiv-
ity is higher for small deflections than for large ones
(ca. 5 ×10–5N/° as compared to ca. 1 ×10–4N/°),
which goes along with a corresponding relative de-
crease of the moment at the hair base with increasing
stimulus load.
Finite element analysis (Dechant et al., 2001) brought to
light even more evidence of “clever engineering”. Axial
stresses (the major stress component) in the hair due to
its bending reach values of up to ca. 3 ×105N/m2. Max-
imum stress values remain largely the same although the
loads introduced at the different contact points differ
considerably during a loading cycle. In other words, thehair shaft is a structure of equal maximal strength which
implies that critical stress values are successfully
avoided by a corresponding adjustment of the hair’s
cross section (and thus J) along its length. Several re-
gions of the hair shaft with differing mechanical proper-
ties can indeed be distinguished (Dechant et al., 2001).
Micromechanical refinement in the smallest detail!
No sense in senses without behavior 
When trying to understand sensory systems, one must
never forget that for the animal the “goal” is not ab-
stract knowledge but survival and reproduction. The
sense of senses is not in their technical perfection per
se, as fascinating as their “design” may be. In the last
instance the sense of senses is in the biological meaning
of the nervous signals which result from highly selected
and filtered stimuli. It is the relation to a particular be-
havior which qualifies these signals as information.
In the following this shall be illustrated with a few ex-
amples not taken from the brain but from the sensory
cells far out in the periphery.
277Spider Senses
Zoology 105(2002) 4


Prey capture 
Cupiennius is a nocturnal sit and wait predator. Shortly
after sundown, when the light intensity has fallen to
about 15 lux, it turns around and leaves its retreat, typi-
cally staying nearby for about half an hour until, to the
human eye, it has become completely dark. Then, at a
light intensity below 0.1 lux, Cupiennius walks onto a
leaf where it sits fully exposed in wait for prey. By this
time the wind has died down and insects start emerging
from their hiding places. When Cupiennius slightly
raises its body the experienced observer knows that it
has noticed potential prey like a cockroach or a
grasshopper, crawling around on the plant at a distance
of half a meter or more. When the victim is within
reach, it is overwhelmed within a few hundred millisec-
onds (Fig. 1B). Evidently, this behavior is based on a
substantial amount of sensory information.The most
important clues telling the spider about the presence
and location of prey are transmitted through the plant
and air, respectively: (1) Substrate vibrations like those
produced by a cockroach while walking around on the
plant; (2) air movements like those produced by an in-
sect while passing by in flight (reviews: Barth, 1998,
2001). How does Cupiennius recognize the biologically
meaningful prey signal and distinguish it from back-
ground noise?
Substrate vibrations
According to the measurement of vibrations on their
dwelling plants in the field, the spiders are exposed to
three types of vibrations which differ in regard to thespectrum of the frequencies the vibrations contain 
(Fig. 6). ( a) “Abiotic” vibrations caused by windare
characterized by very low frequencies, usually with a
peak well below 10 Hz. The spectrum is very narrow.
Often there are no components above 10 Hz, and if pre-
sent they are smaller by 40 to 60 dB than the main peak.
(b) Quite in contrast to the wind induced vibratory back-
ground, preysignals such as those produced by a cock-
roach are “noisy”, that is to say that they are broad-band
and contain higher frequency components. Their domi-
nant peaks are between 400 Hz and 900 Hz and the
–20dB frequency bands extend from a few Hz to ca.
900 Hz. (c) The male vibratory courtship signals, which
will be considered more extensively below, are charac-
terized by their regular temporal structure with syllables
produced in sequences of up to 50 at intervals of about
350 ms. The most prominent frequency components are
close to 100 Hz, roughly between “wind” and “prey”.
The female courtship vibrations lack the syllable struc-
ture and are temporally more irregular than the male sig-
nal, with a broader frequency spectrum and the main
components between 20 Hz and 50 Hz. 
According to numerous experiments, the spiders do in-
deed distinguish between vibrations caused by wind,
prey, and the sexual partner, respectively. There is also
good evidence that they actually use the above-men-
tioned characteristics to accomplish this. In the present
context, this implies that prey-catching behavior can be
elicited significantly more often with broad-band sig-
nals than with sine wave vibrations. The results of neu-
rophysiological experiments are consistent with this.
The sensory cells of the metatarsal vibration receptor
278F. G. Barth 
Zoology 105(2002) 4
Fig. 6.The vibrational environ-
ment of Cupiennius in its natural
habitat when sitting on its dwelling
plant. Left:oscillograms, right:fre-
quency spectra of typical signals.
From top to bottom: male courtship
vibration, prey (cockroach) crawl-
ing on the plant, and vibrations due
to wind (after Barth, 1986).

are significantly more sensitive (by as much as about
10 dB) to narrow-band vibrations (bandwidth 1/3 oc-
tave, Q = 0.35) than to pure sinusoidal stimulation. The
same applies to vibration sensitive interneurons in the
CNS, where the difference can be as great as 20 dB
(Speck-Hergenröder and Barth 1987). Another argu-
ment supporting the idea that peripheral sensory filter-
ing reflects behavioral needs, is provided by the shape
of the threshold curves of the slits of the metatarsal
organ. The slits all behave like high-pass filters.
Whereas they are relatively insensitive up to about 40
Hz (in some slits only 1 Hz or 20 Hz), their sensitivity
increases rapidly towards higher frequencies. In more
practical terms this means that at low frequencies the
tarsus must be displaced by 10–2to 10–3cm in order to
elicit a response, while at higher frequencies this value
falls by up to 40 dB per decade, reaching 10–6to 10–7cm
(10 Å) at 1 kHz (Barth and Geethabali 1982). All avail-
able information suggests that the primary sensory
cells block the low frequencies typical of background
vibrations. They seem to be the first part of a neuronal
two-stage filter and followed by vibration sensitive
interneurons which in all our experiments invariably
showed threshold curves with a well pronounced opti-
mum in the low (ca. 100 Hz), middle or high frequency
range, picking out the biologically relevant signals
from the mixture of frequencies contained in a vibra-
tory stimulus (Barth, 1998).
The remarkable absolute sensitivity of the spider vibra-
tion receptor as such is of course not only of academic
interest, but highly relevant in regard to the range of a
sensory system. Here is another parameter in the sen-sory periphery relevant for our understanding of behav-
ior. When knowing ( a) the intensity and frequency
components of the natural signals originally emitted
and (b) the transmission properties of typical “ Cupien-
niusplants” in addition to the threshold curves of the
primary sensory cells, the range of vibratory signals can
be determined. This was done in some detail with re-
gard to the vibratory signals used by Cupiennius to
communicate during courtship (reviews: Barth, 1997,
2001). The distance record for courtship communica-
tion in the field so far is 3.8 m. It was measured in
Costa Rica with a male and female C. coccineus sitting
on a banana plant. Such remarkable distances to a large
degree rely on the fact that the metatarsal organs of spi-
ders are among the most sensitive vibration receptors in
the animal kingdom.
Air movements
In Cupiennius (unlike in orb weavers which need web
vibrations as indicators of an insect caught in the web
and thus approachable) prey-catching behavior can be
easily elicited by air movements alone. A hungry spider
jumps towards a buzzing fly held by the experimenter
nearby (Fig. 7). In the wild, why doesn’t the spider ever
jump into the air and try to catch the ever present wind?
To answer this question one first needs to know in more
detail the kind of airflow fields Cupiennius encounters
in its habitat. It will then turn out that properties of the
sensory periphery again reflect properties of biologi-
cally relevant stimuli. 
When darkness has fallen and Cupiennius has left its
retreat to prey, typically the air is still warm and damp
279Spider Senses
Zoology 105(2002) 4
Fig. 7.Airflow stimuli and prey
capture behavior. Left: Sequence of
video frames showing the spider’s
reaction to the airflow produced by a
fly flying on a leash (modified from
Brittinger 1998). Middle: Spectra of
the airflow signal behind a tethered
flying fly at increasing distance from
the fly (modified from Barth and
Höller, 1999). Above right: Charac-
teristic spectrum of airflow mea-
sured above the spider sitting on its
dwelling plant after sundown (after
Barth et al., 1995).

but the air movement is much slower than during day-
light and also much steadier with a prominent reduc-
tion of the likelihood of gusts (Fig. 7). Measurements
of the wind above spiders waiting for prey on their
customary plants in Costa Rica during their nighttime
activity period reveal ed the following. Flow velocities
typically are below 0.1 m/s and r.m.s. values (as a mea-
sure of fluctuations) below 15%. Velocities of up to 
0.4 m/s were only observed rarely. The background flow
is dominated by frequencies below 10 Hz and character-
ized by a remarkably narrow frequency spectrum (Barth
et al., 1995), strongly reminding of the abiotic plant vi-
brations (Fig. 6). One important advantage that Cupien-
niusobtains by being active at night becomes obvious
when the characteristics of the background flow are
compared to those of a typical prey signal.
Taking the fly signal as an example, which so promptly
elicits prey capture behavior, the following properties
are likely to be typical features of airborne prey signals
in general. The downward directed airstream represent-
ing the fly signal reaches velocities of up to about 
1 m/s, 4 to 7.5 cm behind and below the fly. The fluctu-
ations in local mean velocity are of the order of 25%,
but sometimes up to 56%, as compared to 2 to 3% of
the undisturbed background. The frequencies produced
by the fly are in the region of 100 Hz. However, the
proportion of high frequencies in the spectrum rapidly
changes with distance. At a distance of 25 to 30 cm
from the fly the spectrum of the airflow very much re-
sembles that of the background flow (Fig. 7; Barth and
Höller, 1999).
Remarkably, this is also the distance at which Cupien-
niusdoes not react with approach behavior to the air-
flow signal of a fly anymore. The maximal distances
from which a reaction can be elicited depend on the
exact position and orientation of the signal source and
vary between about 17 and 27 cm. The spider “sees”
with its trichobothria equally well in all horizontal di-
rections (Brittinger, 1998; Barth 2001). This nicely cor-
responds to the distributed arrangement of the flow sen-
sors on the legs and pedipalps all around the spider’s
body. After ablation of the trichobothria Cupiennius
does not react anymore. 
The “mechanical” range of a single trichobothrium
(taking the deflection of its shaft as a measure) when
stimulated with the fly signal also used in the behav-
ioral experiments, is 50 to 70 cm. Its “physiological”
range (indicated by the discharge of action potentials)
agrees with this finding. Why then is it that the spider
does not jump towards a fly more than about 25 cm
away? We assume that the spider recognizes the
changes in the signal which occur with increasing dis-
tance from the signal source. At a distance of 25 cm the
airflow resembles background flow and thus has lost its
behavioral significance. In addition, a signal from thatfar away has taken several seconds to arrive at the spi-
der, so that an attempted prey capture hardly has a
chance of success. It would probably also take the spi-
der too long to approach the prey.
Physiologically, the receptor cells of single trichoboth-
ria are tuned to a frequency range between 50 and 120
Hz (in the coresponding experiment the hair is directly
coupled to a vibrator) which agrees with important
components of the air currents produced by flying in-
sects (Barth and Höller, 1999). Remarkably, this is in-
dependent of trichobothrium length. The differences in
frequency tuning of hairs of different length found
under natural stimulus conditions (ranges between 40
and 600 Hz) are mainly due to reasons of fluid mechan-
ics (see above). 
Apart from their frequency tuning and absolute sensi-
tivity, it is the strictly phasic response behavior of the
trichobothria which seems to reflect properties of the
biologically relevant stimuli. Trichobothria are velocity
(and acceleration) sensitive, which is no surprise when
considering that it is the frictional forces in the airflow
which drive them. The receptor cells exclusively re-
spond to the movement of the hairs, not however to
static deflection. Likewise, interneurons in the spider
CNS were found to predominantly respond to the sud-
den increases of flow velocity (Friedel and Barth,
1997). Remembering the properties of the prey signal,
we conclude that the trichobothrial system is excel-
lently suited to encode its characteristic highly fluctuat-
ing time course. According to the responses of primary
sensory cells like that shown in Figure 8, this is indeed
the case.
Courtship
In Cupiennius the time the male and the female spend
together is less than one hour. After this period the sex-
ual partners go their separate ways as before. Their
brief meeting, however, is full of ingenious mecha-
nisms which together ensure reproduction. On the way
to copulation it is again the vibration sense which plays
a prominent role because there is a highly developed vi-
bratory communication between the sexes (review:
Barth, 1997, 2001). 
Communication is initiated by the female. Her dragline
contains a sexual pheromone identified as the S-
dimethyl ester of citric acid (Tichy et al., 2000; Schulz
et al., 2000). When the male encounters a female
dragline on his nocturnal wanderings, he examines it
carefully with the chemoreceptive hairs on his pedi-
palps, assumes the courtship posture (slightly raising
his body), and finally starts to produce vibrations by os-
cillatory up-and-down movements of the opisthosoma.
The substrate vibrations thus induced in the plant
through the legs are propagated through the plant as
280F. G. Barth 
Zoology 105(2002) 4

bending waves. Their mean attenuation of about 
0.3 dB/cm is comparatively small, an important reason
being that they are of low frequency. As a consequence,
the male vibrations reach the female at surprisingly
long distances. The maximum so far observed by us on
a banana plant in Costa Rica was 3.8 m. The female re-
sponds to the male with her own vibrations within a
narrow time window of about 1 s (Fig. 9). After having
received the presumptive partner’s signal, the male
starts approaching the female while their reciprocal vi-
bratory “flirting” continues.
As mentioned earlier, the male opisthosomal vibratory
signals are characterized by a distinct temporal pattern
which not only sets it apart from background and prey
vibrations but also plays a crucial role in species identi-
fication by the female and thus in reproductive isola-
tion. Accordingly, the temporal (not so much the spec-
tral) patterns of the male vibratory signals are species
specific. In C. salei, individual packets of up to 50 syl-
lables are separated by silent pauses lasting up to 10 s.
On average, syllable duration is 100 ms and pause dura-
tion in between successive syllables is 250 ms. In
species living sympatrically like C. getazi and C. coc-
cineusthe relevance of reproductive isolation is obvi-
ous. Hence, courtship signals of the spider’s own
species must be distinguished not only from prey andbackground vibrations, but also from the courtship vi-
brations of other Cupiennius species. 
After having demonstrated behaviorally that Cupien-
niuscan indeed do this and after having identified vari-
ous properties of the female releasing mechanism, the
question was, how the female vibration receptor re-
sponds to the male signal and, more precisely, how well
the temporal patterns are encoded by it. As it turns out,
the metatarsal organ is well tuned to certain parameters
of the male signal and there is considerable filtering
which in some importants respects closely matches the
results of behavioral experiments (Baurecht and Barth,
1992, 1993).
Amplitude
The stimuli reaching the metatarsal organ vary greatly
in amplitude. This is not only due to the varying vigor
of the signal sender, but also to varying geometric and
other conditions of stimulus transmission to the female
receiver through the plant. As was to be expected from
this, signal amplitude is among the less influential sig-
nal parameters in behavior. Likewise, individual slits of
the metatarsal vibration receptor can cover the entire
natural range of acceleration amplitudes of about
3–1000 mm/s2. They accomplish this by a logarithmic
relationship between syllable acceleration amplitude
281Spider Senses
Zoology 105(2002) 4
Fig. 8.Response of trichobothrium
to airflow stimulus produced by fly-
ing fly (see Fig. 7). Top:Arrange-
ment of trichobothria on walking
leg of Cupiennius salei . The exam-
ined trichobothrium belongs to
group D1. Middle:The fly signal
given as airflow velocity. Bottom:
Response (original recording of ac-
tion potentials and discharge fre-
quency) of one of the sensory cells
associated with the trichobothrium
(after Barth and Höller, 1999).

Fig. 9.Vibratory signals used by
Cupiennius salei to communicate
with its sexual partner during
courtship. Oscillogram (lower trace,
acceleration of plant leaf) and “son-
agram” (vibrogam) of a series of 9
male syllables followed by a female
vibratory response. Note the energy
maxima (red areas) at very low
frequencies (male: around 100 Hz;
female: around 40 Hz; data from
D.Baurecht; Barth, 2001).
and discharge rate. Remarkably, the response threshold
both for the female spider’s behavior and the individual
slit is about 8 mm/s2. At the other end of the scale, that
is at stimulus amplitudes greater than about 1.000
mm/s2(and thus exceeding the highest naturally occur-
ring amplitudes), the synchronization between the re-
ceptor response and the male signal rapidly decreases.
This implies that the receptor doesn’t precisely copy the
signal’s temporal structure anymore (Fig. 10). The rea-
son is an increasing number of action potentials be-
tweenthe syllables, that is during the silent period of
the vibratory signal. We assume that the sensory misin-
terpretation at too-high amplitudes is an important rea-
son for the marked decline in female behavioral re-
sponses in the same amplitude range. The argument is
strengthened by the finding that the vibration signals
produced by scratching and drumming with the pedi-
palps which contain higher frequency components than
the opisthosoma signals and have differing ethological
significance, are to a great extent processed separately
from the opisthosoma signals by the female’s
metatarsal organ. Remarkably, the response curves of
the corresponding small slits of the metatarsal organ are
not logarithmic but linear between 10 and 10,000
mm/s2(Fig. 11; Baurecht and Barth, 1992, 1993).
Temporal pattern
Important filter properties of a sensory organ may not at
all be obvious from its responses to “clean” laboratory
stimuli such as simple sinusoidal vibration in the given
case. The special behavioral significance of the tempo-
ral pattern of the male courtship signal has already been
mentioned. Is there a particular match between the re-sponse characteristics of the metatarsal organ and this
pattern?
Stimulation of the female vibration receptor with entire
natural male courtship series consisting of many sylla-
bles indicates that this is indeed the case (Baurecht and
Barth, 1993). (1) As the series proceeds, the number of
action potentials per syllable decreases. The quality of
the representation of the temporal pattern (syllables,
pauses), however, is maintained. (2) When using series
with increasing numbers of syllables, it turns out that the
signal-to-noise ratio becomes larger, because the syn-
chronization of stimulus and excitation improves pro-
gressively and the number of nerve impulses between
syllables decreases. (3) The end of the series of syllables
is especially marked by a poststimulatory depression of
the receptor response which falls below the spontaneous
discharge rate. Remarkably, behavioral experiments had
shown that a series must consist of at least three syllables
to cause a female response in 50% of cases (with the re-
sponse rate increasing until the series contains 12 sylla-
bles), and also that only syllables grouped to form series,
that is packets of syllables, effectively elicit a female re-
sponse (Schüch and Barth, 1990).
What do we learn from this?
1. The sensory world of Cupiennius and of many other
spiders (though not all) is to a high degree dominated
by mechanical stimuli. The ability to detect cuticular
strains, tactile stimuli, air movements, and substrate vi-
brations is exquisite. It provides the spider with highly
resolved pictures of a multitude of mechanical events.
282F. G. Barth 
Zoology 105(2002) 4


Fig. 10. Top:Response of one of
the long slits (slit 2, PST histo-
grams) of a female metatarsal lyri-
form organ of Cupiennius salei to
synthetic male courtship vibrations
to show dependence of copying
properties on signal (acceleration)
amplitude. Bottom: Synchronization
coefficient SCas a measure of the
copying quality. SC = 1 indicates
perfect copying of syllable and
pause duration, SC = 0 indicates no
copying. Note relationship between
receptor response and behavioral
response (after Baurecht and Barth,
1993). 
The corresponding sensors are all widely distributed
over the body surface allowing for adequate spatial res-
olution.
2. Neurobiology starts way out in the periphery. By
their well developed filter properties, the sensors al-ready considerably influence behavior. It seems that
this is one of the reasons why arthropods perform so
well behaviorally despite the small size of their brain.
The spider’s sensory periphery not only is “clever”, but
also has at its disposal an enormous number of sensory
283Spider Senses
Zoology 105(2002) 4
Fig. 11. Difference in response
characteristics of long slit 2 and
short slit 11 of female metatarsal
organ to vibrational stimuli (male
syllables) of increasing intensity
(acceleration amplitude). 95% con-
fidence interval of spontaneous dis-
charge frequency denotes threshold
of slit 2. Note logarithmic relation-
ship between stimulus and response
of slit 2 between 3 and 1000 mm/s2
and linearity of same relationship in
case of slit 11 over the whole range
tested (after Baurecht and Barth,
1993).

cells, which by far exceeds that of the neurons in the
central nervous system (CNS).
3. Sensors are not the transparent windows to the
world as we tend to consider them. They rather inform
the CNS only or very preferentially about the biologi-
cally (behaviorally) relevant stimulus patterns.
4. Evolutionary processes are remarkably creative. Per-
manent “quality control” through natural selective pres-
sures over millions of years often led to masterpieces of
“engineering”. Spider senses exemplify this nicely. This
is fascinating in its own right, but also stresses the po-
tential lying in a close cooperation between biologists
and engineers. Artificial micro- and nanosensors have
gained enormous importance in industry, bioengineer-
ing, medicine, robotics, manufacturing and intra- and
extraterrestrial exploration. What the biologists can
offer here are not ready-made instructions of how to
build and manufacture a sensor, but their familiarity
with a treasure house of inspiring solutions to a wide
spectrum of sensory problems. The most valuable input
from engineering to sensory biology, on the other hand,
is the application of computational skills and mathemat-
ical quantification (Barth et al., 2002).
5. Obviously, biology is also fascinating in areas where
its questions are not primarily derived from a molecu-
lar, but from an organismic point of view. Karl von
Frisch was an unrivalled master of this kind of ap-
proach. His discoveries inspired many fields of zoolog-
ical research now flourishing. Comparative sensory bi-
ology is the most prominent among them and still offers
endless opportunities to celebrate the ingenuity of life. 
Acknowledgements
I am grateful for the invitation to deliver this lecture at
the occasion of the award of the Karl von Frisch-Medal
at the annual meeting of the Deutsche Zoologische
Gesellschaft in Halle (2002). Our own research reported
in this paper was funded by the German and (since 1987)
by the Austrian Science Foundation (DFG, FWF). Many
thanks go to Raphael Barth, who patiently and compe-
tently helped with the preparation of the figures.
References
Barth, F. G. 1986. Vibrationssinn und vibratorische Umwelt von
Spinnen. Naturwissenschaften 73 (9): 519–530.
Barth, F. G. 1997. Vibratory communication in spiders: Adapta-
tion and compromise at many levels. In: M. Lehrer (ed.) Orien-
tation and Communication in Arthropods. Birkhäuser, Basel:
247–272. Barth, F. G. 1998. The vibrational sense of spiders. In: Hoy RR,
AN Popper, RR Fay (eds.) Springer Handbook of Auditory Re-
search. Comparative Hearing: Insects. Springer, New York:
228–278.
Barth, F. G. 2000. How to catch the wind: spider hairs specialized
for sensing the movement of air. Naturwissenschaften 83:
51–58.
Barth, F. G. 2001. Sinne und Verhalten: aus dem Leben einer
Spinne. Springer Verlag, Berlin. English edition 2002. A Spi-
der’s World: Senses and Behavior. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Barth, F. G. and J. Bohnenberger. 1978. Lyriform slit sense
organ: threshold and stimulus amplitude ranges in a multi-unit
mechanoreceptor. J. Comp. Physiol. 125: 37–43.
Barth, F. G. and D. Cordes. 1998. Cupiennius remedius (Araneae,
Ctenidae), a new species in Central America, and a key for the
genus Cupiennius . J. Arachnol. 26: 133–141.
Barth, F. G. and H.-E. Dechant. 2002. Arthropod cuticular hairs:
tactile sensors and the refinement of stimulus transformation.
In: Barth F.G., J.A.C. Humphrey, T.W. Secomb (eds.) Sensors
and Sensing in Biology and Engineering. Springer Verlag,
Wien: 159–171.
Barth, F. G. and Geethabali. 1982. Spider vibration receptors.
Threshold curves of individual slits in the metatarsal lyriform
organ. J. Comp. Physiol. A 148: 175–185.
Barth, F. G. and A. Höller. 1999. Dynamics of arthropod filiform
hairs. V. The response of spider trichobothria to natural stim-
uli. Phil. Trans R. Soc. Lond. B 354: 183–192.
Barth, F. G. and H.-P. Pickelmann. 1975. Lyriform slit sense or-
gans. Modelling an arthropod mechanoreceptor. J. Comp.
Physiol. 103: 39–54.
Barth, F. G., E. Ficker and H.-U. Federle. 1984. Model studies on
the mechanical significance of grouping in compound spider
slit sensilla. Zoomorphology 104: 204–215.
Barth, F. G., U. Wastl, J. A. C. Humphrey and R. Devarakonda.
1993. Dynamics of arthropod filiform hairs. II. Mechanical
properties of spider trichobothria ( Cupiennius salei KEYS.)
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 340: 445–461.
Barth, F. G., J. A. C. Humphrey, U. Wastl, J. Halbritter and W.
Brittinger. 1995. Dynamics of arthropod filiform hairs. III.
Flow patterns related to air movement detection in a spider
(Cupiennius salei KEYS.). Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 347:
397–412.
Barth, F. G., J. A. C. Humphrey and T. W. Secomb (eds.). 2002.
Sensors and Sensing in Biology and Engineering. Springer
Verlag, Wien (in print).
Baurecht, D. and F. G. Barth. 1992. Vibratory communication in
spiders. I. Representation of male courtship signals by female
vibration receptor. J. Comp. Physiol. A 171: 231–243. 
Baurecht, D. and F. G. Barth. 1993. Vibratory communication in
spiders. II. Representation of parameters contained in synthetic
male courtship signals by female vibration receptor. J. Comp.
Physiol. A 173: 309–319.
Bohnenberger, J. 1981. Matched transfer characteristics of single
units in a compound slit sense organ. J. Comp. Physiol. A 142:
391–401.
Blickhan, R. and F. G. Barth. 1985. Strains in the exoskeleton of
spiders. J. Comp. Physiol. A 157: 115–147.
Brittinger, W. 1998. Trichobothrien, Medienströmungen und das
Orientierungsverhalten von Jagdspinnen ( Cupiennius salei
Keys). Dissertation, University Vienna.
Dechant, H.-E., F. G. Rammerstorfer and F. G. Barth. 2001.
Arthropod touch reception: stimulus transformation and finite
element model of spider tactile hairs. J. Comp. Physiol. A 187:
313–322; see also erratum p. 851.
284F. G. Barth 
Zoology 105(2002) 4

Friedel, T. and F. G. Barth. 1997. Wind-sensitive interneurones in
the spider CNS (Cupiennius salei ). Directional information
processing of sensory inputs from trichobothria on the walking
legs. J. Comp. Physiol. A 180: 223–233.
Humphrey, J. A. C., R. Devarakonda, J. Iglesias and F. G. Barth.
1993. Dynamics of arthropod filiform hairs. I. Mathematical
modelling of the hair and air motions. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B 340: 423–444.
Humphrey, J. A. C., F. G. Barth and K. Voss. 2001. The motion-
sensing hairs of arthropods: using physics to understand sen-
sory ecology and adaptive evolution. In: Barth F.G., A. Schmid
(eds.). The Ecology of Sensing. Springer Verlag, Berlin:
105–125.
Humphrey, J. A. C., F. G. Barth, M. Reed and A. Spak. 2002.
Arthropod motion sensing hairs: biological models for micro-
electromechanical sensors. In: Barth F.G, J.A.C. Humphrey,
T.W Secomb (eds.). Sensors and Sensing in Biology and Engi-
neering. Springer Verlag, Wien: 129–144.
Keyserling, E. 1877. Über amerikanische Spinnenarten der Un-
terordnung Citigradae. Verh. zool-bot. Ges. Wien 26: 609–708. 
Lachmuth, U., M. Grasshoff and F. G. Barth. 1984. Taxono-
mische Revision der Gattung Cupiennius SIMON 1891 (Arach-
nida, Araneae, Ctenidae). Senck. biol. 65: 329–372.
Schüch, W. and F. G. Barth. 1990. Vibratory communication in a
spider: female responses to synthetic male vibrations. J. Comp.
Physiol. A 166: 817–826.Schulz, S., M. Papke, H. Tichy, E. Gingl and R. Ehn. 2000. Iden-
tification of a new sex pheromone from silk dragline of the
tropical hunting spider Cupiennius salei . Angew. Chem. 39:
4339–4341.
Shimozawa, T., J. Murakami and T. Kumagai. 2002. Cricket
wind receptors: Thermal noise for the highest sensitivity
known. In: Barth F. G., J. A. C. Humphrey, T. W. Secomb
(eds.). Sensors and Sensing in Biology and Engineering.
Springer Verlag, Wien: 145–157.
Speck-Hergenröder, J. and F. G. Barth.1987. Tuning of vibration
sensitive neurons in the central nervous system of a wandering
spider, Cupiennius salei Keys. J. Comp. Physiol. A 160:
467–475.
Stokes, G. G. 1851. On the effect of the internal friction of fluids
on the motion of pendulums. Trans. Camb. Phil. Soc. 9: 8ff
(reprinted in: Mathematical and Physical Papers, Vol III, pp.
1–141. Cambridge Univ. Press 1901).
Thurm, U. 1982. Grundzüge der Transduktionsmechanismen in
Sinneszellen. Mechano-elektrische Transduktion. In: Hoppe W.,
W. Lohmann, H. Markl, H. Ziegler (eds.). Biophysik. Springer
Verlag, Berlin: 681–696.
Tichy, H., E. Gingl, R. Ehn, M. Papke and S. Schulz. 2000. Fe-
male sex pheromone of a wandering spider ( Cupiennius salei ).
Identification and sensory reception. J. Comp. Physiol. A 187:
75–78.
285Spider Senses
Zoology 105(2002) 4