Agile Coaching Learning 
Outcomes 
Version 5.1

LICENSING INFORMATION 

The  work  in  this  document  was  facilitated  by  the  International  Consortium  for  Agile 
(ICAgile) and done by the contribution of various Agile Experts and Practitioners. These 
Learning Outcomes are intended to help the growing Agile community worldwide. 

This  work  is  licensed  under  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives  4.0  International  License.  To  view  a  copy  of  this  license,  visit  http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ or send a letter to Creative Commons, PO 
Box 1866, Mountain View, CA 94042, USA. 

YOU ARE FREE TO: 

Share — copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format 

UNDER THE FOLLOWING TERMS: 

Attribution — You must give appropriate credit to The International Consortium for Agile 
(ICAgile), provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do 
so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests ICAgile endorses you or 
your use. 

NonCommercial — You may not use the material for commercial purposes. 

NoDerivatives  —  If  you  remix,  transform,  or  build  upon  the  material,  you  may  not 
distribute the modiﬁed material. 

NOTICES: 

You  do  not  have  to  comply  with  the  license  for  elements  of  the  material  in  the  public 
domain or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation. 

No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions necessary 
for  your  intended  use.  For  example,  other  rights  such  as  publicity,  privacy,  or  moral 
rights may limit how you use the material. 

PAGE 
LICENSING INFORMATION

 2

SPECIAL THANKS 

ICAgile would like to thank the contributors to the Agile Coaching 
Learning Outcomes:  
Marsha Acker • Lyssa Adkins • Luke Lackrone • Timothy Meyers • 
Ahmed Sidky • Michael Spayd 

PAGE 
SPECIAL THANKS

 3

 
CONTENTS 

2 LICENSING INFORMATION

3 SPECIAL THANKS

4 TABLE OF CONTENTS

5 HOW TO READ THIS DOCUMENT

6 LEARNING OUTCOMES

6 1. DEVELOPMENT IN THE AGILE COACHING DISCIPLINE

6 1.1. The Agile Coaching Mindset

7 2. COACH AS PROFESSIONAL COACH

7 2.1. Foundational Professional Coaching Skills

8 2.2. The Coaching Conversation – Coaching for Action

9 3. COACH AS MENTOR

9 3.1. Key Mentoring Skills

9 3.2. Mentoring Agile Role Transitions

10 4. COACH AS TEACHER

10 4.1. Key Teaching Skills

11 4.2. Agile Mindset Shifts and Frameworks

11 5. COACH AS TEAM COACH

11 5.1. Foundational Team Coaching

12 5.2. Describing Team Development

13 5.3. Coaching the Journey toward High Performance

13 5.4. Handling Conﬂict and Dysfunction within the Team

14 5.5. Handle Organizational Impediments

14 6. SET BOUNDARIES FOR AGILE COACHING

14 6.1. Coaching Alliances and Contracts

PAGE 
 4
CONTENTS

 
 
 
HOW TO READ THIS DOCUMENT 

This document outlines the Learning Outcomes that must be addressed by accredited 
training organizations intending to offer ICAgile’s Agile Coaching certiﬁcation. 

Each LO follows a particular pattern, described below. 

0.0.0. Learning Outcome Name 

Additional Context, describing why this Learning Outcome is important or what it 
is intended to impart.  

The  Learning  Outcome  purpose,  further  describing  what  is  expected  to  be 
imparted on the learner (e.g. a key point, framework, model, approach, technique, 
or skill). 

PAGE 
HOW TO READ THIS DOCUMENT

 5

 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 

1. DEVELOPMENT IN THE AGILE COACHING DISCIPLINE 

1.1. THE AGILE COACHING MINDSET 

1.1.1. Deﬁnition of Agile Coaching 

Professionals operating at the Agile Coaching step make conscious choices about 
their actions in the service of teams. 

Provide guidance on how to choose and/or combine the four basic skills in each 
moment  (coaching,  facilitating,  mentoring  and  teaching)  that  will  best  serve  the 
situation.  Practical  advice  on  which  to  choose  and  how,  along  with  skills  to 
cultivate the needed self-awareness and self-management, are taught in this LO.  

1.1.2. Coach as Agile Role Model 

Effective Agile Coaches are the “ﬁrst Agilist.” 

Make the case that personally embodying the Agile values and principles is a key 
component of being an Agile Coach, and is gained through real-world experience 
with agile delivery.  

1.1.3. Achieving Essential Mindset Shifts 

Effective Agile coaches successfully make some key mindset shifts and serve as a 
living example of how one can thrive within these new mindsets.  

Introduce key mindset shifts and help learners see ways to live these shifts in their 
own  lives.  Key  mindset  shifts  may  include:  focus  on  team  improvement  over 
speciﬁc  results;  focus  on  business  value-driven  delivery  over  achieving  scope, 
schedule or budget targets; focus on the leverage in the present moment over the 
past or future; focus on staying curious and seeing the best in people over judging 
or  manipulating;  focus  on  assisting  the  team  in  achieving  their  commitment  and 
learning when they do not achieve it rather than stepping in and doing it for them; 
employing  a  “servant  as  leader”  style  rather  than  “telling”  style  (see  Robert 
Greenleaf). 

1.1.4. Achieving Self-Awareness/Self-Management in the Coach 

Self-management  is  a  critical  Agile  Coaching  skill  that  can  be  learned  and 
increased. 

Introduce one or more models of self-awareness that impact one's ability to be an 
effective  Agile  Coach.  Further,  this  LO  is  concerned  with  giving  the  learner 
techniques  for  managing  themselves,  their  biases,  assumptions  and  emotions 
within  a  coaching  context.  To  be  effective,  the  Agile  Coach  must  be  both  self-
aware  (e.g.,  know  when  she  is  biased  about  a  given  topic)  and  use  self-
management  (e.g.,  not  let  her  bias  affect  how  she  facilitates  the  meeting). There 
are  many  models  of  self-awareness  (e.g.,  emotional  intelligence,  Myers-Briggs, 
various  personality  inventories,  various  self-awareness  mindfulness  techniques) 

PAGE 
LEARNING OUTCOMES

 6

that  can  guide  the  coach.  Most  important  is  to  choose  at  least  one  model  and 
apply it. 

1.1.5. Agile Coaching Stance 

An  Agile  Coaching  stance  gives  a  coach  something  to  hold  onto  --  a  center,  an 
anchor -- in their professional storms.  

Guide  the  learner  into  understanding  an  Agile  Coaching  stance  --  a  blend  of  their 
skills  and  attitudes  they  will  need  to  hold-to  in  the  work  of  Agile  Coaching:  a 
mindful “how to be.” An Agile Coach blends their core skills of facilitation, teaching, 
professional coaching and mentoring, along with other relevant skills and attitudes 
--  perhaps  related  to  conﬂict  navigation,  interpersonal  communication,  individual 
change  or  technical  craft  (as  examples).  The  intent  is  that  the  coach-at-work 
should  consciously  consider  and  choose  from  their  stance,  as  they  partner  with 
teams and individuals for their success. As a matter of instruction, a model Agile 
Coaching  stance  could  be  provided,  or  the  learner  may  be  guided  into  designing 
their own. 

1.1.6. Ethical Considerations of Agile Team Coaching 

Understanding  our  own  ethical  boundaries  as  a  coach  helps  us  know  what  and 
where our limits are. 

Deﬁne  what  ethical  considerations  should  be  addressed  when  coaching 
individuals  and  teams.  Explore  this  topic  from  the  perspective  of  a  leader,  agile 
coach,  professional  coach,  and  their  own  personal  boundaries.  Introduce  the 
learner to the Agile Alliance Code of Ethics initiative. 

2. COACH AS PROFESSIONAL COACH 

2.1. FOUNDATIONAL PROFESSIONAL COACHING SKILLS 

2.1.1. Basics of Using Emotional Intelligence as Underpinning 

Developing  one’s  emotional  intelligence  (EQ)  is  necessary  for  using  professional 
coaching skills in service of others. 

Introduce one or more models for emotional intelligence and make the connection 
that  EQ  is  the  underpinning  for  professional  coaching  skills  because  it  enables 
self-awareness and self-management. 

2.1.2. Presence 

Being  fully  present  as  a  coach  is  key  to  successful  coaching.  Methods  for 
presence 
include  building  rapport,  awareness  of  the  environment,  self-
management and consciously preparing for coaching. 

Teach  the  importance  of  presence  and  provide  the  learner  with  techniques  and 
methods for achieving it. 

2.1.3. Listening 

Listening is more than hearing; and, it is a skill that is often taken for granted. To 
be of service, coaches must develop their listening skill. 

PAGE 
LEARNING OUTCOMES

 7

Teach the importance of listening and provide the learner with at least one model 
or technique for developing their listening skill. 

2.1.4. Powerful Questioning 

Powerful  questions  are  open  ended,  thought-provoking  questions  that  trigger 
curiosity  and  stimulate  creativity  /  new  insights.  For  example,  rather  than  asking 
“Did that work?” regarding an action the client took, the coach may ask “What did 
you learn?” 

Familiarize  the  learner  with  the  concept,  examples  and  application  of  powerful 
questions. 

2.1.5. Giving and Receiving Feedback 

Being able to openly receive and provide effective feedback that builds people up 
instead  of  tearing  them  down  is  essential  to  helping  individuals  achieve  their 
potential. 

Provide the learner with techniques for giving effective feedback to coachees and 
being open to receiving feedback from coachees and other coaches. 

2.2. THE COACHING CONVERSATION – COACHING FOR ACTION 

2.2.1. Topic Identiﬁcation 

Coaches  must  be  able  to  help  the  coachee  identify  the  topic  they  would  like  to 
work on; often, it is deeper than what the coachee initially presents. 

Introduce  techniques  for  coaching  others  as  they  identify  the  topic  they  want 
coaching on. This may involve sorting, prioritization, uncovering underlying issues, 
etc. 

2.2.2. Topic Exploration 

The majority of the coaching conversation is spent in exploration. 

Introduce  various  techniques  that  can  be  used  to  explore  the  topic.  Techniques 
might  include  reﬂecting  non-verbal  communications,  perspective  shifting,  asking 
open-ended questions, metaphors, values clariﬁcation, etc.  

2.2.3. Action Commitment 

The coaching conversation successfully completes when the coachee moves into 
action of their own choosing. 

Introduce  techniques  that  can  be  used  to  move  into  effective  action  after  the 
coachee has identiﬁed and explored the relevant topic, thereby helping them take 
responsibility for their actions and their results. 

2.2.4. Conducting the Coaching Conversation 

It  is  important  to  experience  using  the  concept  of  a  coaching  conversation  in  a 
realistic Agile setting. 

Practice  having  a  coaching  conversation  from  beginning  to  end  using 
Foundational  Professional  Coaching  Skills,  to  identify  the  topic  for  coaching. 
Explore the topic and help the coachee come to an action commitment. 

PAGE 
LEARNING OUTCOMES

 8

3. COACH AS MENTOR 

3.1. KEY MENTORING SKILLS 

3.1.1. Give Options While Maintaining Presence 

The act of giving options is a cornerstone for mentorship. The best mentors give 
options in the service of their mentee, ﬁguratively or literally by their side. 

Introduce at least one technique on how to provide options while maintaining full 
presence in service of furthering the mentee’s agenda. 

3.1.2. Articulate Expertise 

You can’t mentor someone in something you don’t know more about than them. 

Clarify  the  connection  between  one’s  expertise  and  their  ability  to  mentor, 
emphasizing that mentoring skills cannot be applied in areas where one’s expertise 
is less than the mentee. 

3.1.3. Mentee at Free Choice 

Actions freely chosen by the mentee are more likely to happen. 

Explore  the  inherent  tension  between  wanting  to  give  direction  and  helping  the 
mentee  explore  options  for  themselves.  Introduce  at  least  one  method  to  honor 
the mentee’s free choice. Mentors should use their power wisely to help mentees 
make choices that are right for them, rather than pushing their own agenda. 

3.2. MENTORING AGILE ROLE TRANSITIONS 

3.2.1. Contrasting Mentoring with Coaching 

Knowing  when  to  coach  and  when  to  mentor  is  a  critical  skill  for  coaches  when 
working with individuals in transition. 

Contrast  coaching  and  mentoring,  exploring  situations  in  which  one  might  be 
preferable over the other. 

3.2.2. Understanding the Individual Change Cycle 

Whether  they  are  just  beginning  in  Agile  environments,  or  as  they  develop  into 
skilled  practitioners,  individuals  on  Agile  teams  are  confronted  with  the  need  to 
learn new skills, develop new mindsets and engage in new relationships with their 
colleagues. In short, they are required to change. 

Introduce  one  or  more  models  for  how  individuals  change,  grow  and  learn.  Such 
models  should  distinguish  between  self-chosen  change  and  organizationally 
imposed change. It should also emphasize the need to “meet a person where they 
are”  in  their  change  process,  rather  than  the  coach  imposing  her/his  beliefs  or 
needs. 

3.2.3. Key Agile Role Transitions 

Everyone  goes  through  some  kind  of  transition  in  their  role  when  they  encounter 
Agile methods and an Agile Coach clearly articulates that transition.  

PAGE 
LEARNING OUTCOMES

 9

Provide an overview of the typical transitions faced by the people in various roles 
and/or responsibilities when Agile is brought in, such as analysts who move out of 
the  customer/team  intermediary  role,  testers  who  become  part  of  the  up-front 
action, product owners who focus on the “what” and “why” of the product and Agile 
managers  who  become  creators  of  Agile  environments.  This  LO  presents  key 
transitions so that Agile Coaches can easily articulate them. (Which roles and their 
transitions to be covered will be dependent on the Course Designer's beliefs about 
Agile roles and their business context.) 

3.2.4. Identifying and Handling Resistance from Individuals 

Agile Coaches use resistance rather than resisting resistance. 

Help  the  learner  decipher  how  to  work  with  resistance  from  individuals  as  they 
take up their Agile roles, rather than seeing resistance as an indication of failure or 
something to be solved. In this LO, the learner is exposed to at least one model for 
working positively with resistance.  

3.2.5. Conducting the Mentoring Conversation 

It’s  important  to  integrate  the  skills  of  mentoring  in  a  mentoring  conversation 
about a real-world Agile situation. 

Practice  mentoring  skills  (which  may  also  include  coaching  skills)  in  a  realistic 
Agile setting. This includes establishing and maintaining presence with a mentee, 
articulating  expertise  and  sharing  experience,  and  keeping  the  mentee  at  free 
choice.  

4. COACH AS TEACHER 

4.1. KEY TEACHING SKILLS 

4.1.1. Use Multiple Content Delivery Mechanisms 

Individuals have a personal learning style. It is essential for the teacher to consider 
and use multiple styles to ensure broadest impact. 

Orient  the  learner  to  the  personal  nature  of  human  learning  and  provide  an 
overview  of  techniques  (e.g.,  visual,  auditory,  tactile,  experiential,  lecture)  that 
should be considered when designing learning experiences. 

4.1.2. Chunk Content into Digestible Pieces 

You should not try to eat an elephant in one bite. 

Expose  the  learner  to  strategies  for  breaking  up  learning  experiences  into  pieces 
that are most likely to take root and help the learners to maintain focus. It is likely 
that  this  LO  will  draw  parallels  or  direct  connections  to  facilitative  techniques 
described elsewhere in the course. 

4.1.3. Check for Understanding 

Silence is not agreement or understanding. New ideas do not always land well, or 
at all. 

PAGE 

 10

LEARNING OUTCOMES

Introduce  techniques  to  help  learners  assess  the  impact  and  understanding  of  a 
new  idea  within  a  student  or  group.  It  is  critical  for  coaches  not  to  simply  ask 
students  “Do  you  understand?”  and  accept  nodding  heads  as  a  positive  indicator 
of  understanding.  Coaches  may  use  many  different  techniques  for  “checking-in”, 
including:  repeating  back  (asking  the  student  to  repeat  the  new  idea),  discussing 
the new idea and its implications, teaching back (asking the student to teach the 
new  idea)  and  reporting  out  (ask  the  students  to  report  in  with  new  experiences 
based on the new idea). 

4.1.4. Create an Environment for Stickiness 

Casting a new idea is the start -- not the end -- of the teacher’s role. 

Arm  the  learner  with  at  least  one  strategy,  model  or  technique  that  promotes 
lesson stickiness (e.g., 10m/24h/7d). 

4.2. AGILE MINDSET SHIFTS AND FRAMEWORKS 

4.2.1. Helping Team Members Experience the Agile Mindset Shifts 

Foundational Agile beliefs must be experienced, not just taught. 

Convey the importance of helping team members experience mindset shifts such 
as  value-driven  priority,  self-organization  or  empirical  process  improvement 
through experiential learning. 

4.2.2. PRACTICE: Distinguishing and Articulating at Least One Agile 

Framework 

Agile  Coaches  know  one  or  more  Agile  frameworks  ‘stone-cold’  and  can  fully 
articulate at least one clearly, simply and quickly. 

Help  the  learner  develop  the  capability  to  articulate  and  teach  at  least  one  Agile 
framework, 
its  associated  roles,  common  practices,  values  and 
principles. 

including 

5. COACH AS TEAM COACH 

5.1. FOUNDATIONAL TEAM COACHING 

5.1.1. Systems View 

Team  coaching  includes  looking  beyond  individual  voices  and  seeing  the  system 
itself. 

Introduce concepts around shifting the coach’s focus from individuals to a whole-
system  perspective.  This  involves  looking  at  the  system  of  all  humans  involved, 
and  the  connections  between  them  in  order  to  see  it  truly  as  an  outsider. 
Everything that happens in a system is data about how the system operates.  

5.1.2. Observation  

An  Agile  Coach  must  develop  muscles  of  observation  apart  from  interpretation 
and evaluation. 

PAGE 

 11

LEARNING OUTCOMES

Help  the  learner  see  with  neutral  eyes  to  differentiate  between  the  facts  of 
observation  (as  a  video  camera  would  capture  it)  and  analysis,  interpretation, 
judgment or evaluation.  

5.1.3. Articulate What's Happening 

Being able to name what you see, in a non-judgemental way, creates awareness for 
the system. 

Help the learners voice their observations, in service of the system becoming more 
self-aware. The ability to present a neutral observation is one of the agile coach’s 
most  basic  interventions.  A  system  that  can  see  itself  may  self-repair  when 
unhealthy dynamics are present.  

5.2. DESCRIBING TEAM DEVELOPMENT 

5.2.1. Describing a Model of Team Development and Using it in Service of 

a Team's Development 

Agile  Coaches  understand  and  use  one  or  more  models  to  illustrate  how  teams 
develop; they are able to use them to articulate where a team is and to help them 
take measured steps forward. 

Introduce  one  or  more  models  for  how  teams  develop  over  time,  and  be  able  to 
use  the  model  to  inform  their  intervention  with  a  team.  This  includes  a  group’s 
conscious  decision  to  become  a  team  and  a  team’s  continued  journey  to  high-
performance.  As  examples,  the  coach  may  detect  the  team’s  current 
developmental level and use that information to inform the design of a team start-
up, reset or recovery, or coaching “in the moment,’ with an intention of empowering 
the team to chart their own path. 

5.2.2. Helping a Team Detect their Own Stage of Development 

Agile  Coaches  develop  a  team’s  capability  to  detect  their  own  stage  of 
development and devise strategies to improve. 

Convey  the  importance  of  raising  the  team’s  capacity  for  self-awareness,  and 
ability to self-heal and self-improve. The coach can do this by sharing one or more 
models  for  team  development  and  giving  the  team  language  and  practice  at 
naming what they see, identifying what’s missing and what’s needed next. 

5.2.3. PRACTICE: Creating a Team Kickoff / Startup Agenda 

Starting  a  team  off  on  the  right  foot  is  crucial  to  the  journey  towards  high 
performance. 

Provide  the  learner  with  an  opportunity  to  design  a  startup  or  re-set  of  a  team 
using a real-world scenario. This would include elements such as helping the team 
get to know one another, create a culture, align on a vision, setting up their work 
environment [5] and establishing team agreements and/or ground rules. 

PAGE 

 12

LEARNING OUTCOMES

5.3. COACHING THE JOURNEY TOWARD HIGH PERFORMANCE 

5.3.1. Deﬁning and Identifying High Performance 

Teams will move in and out of different levels of team functioning on their journey 
to being a high performing team. Many teams will strive for high performance and 
never reach it, others will experience it for a moment in time and it will be gone.  

Help the learner identify characteristics of a high-performing team and to help the 
team  assess  their  performance  and  identify  areas  for  improvement.  The  high 
performing team model needs to support agile team performance characteristics 
(e.g.,  empowerment,  shared  leadership,  vulnerability,  resolving  conﬂict,  trust  and 
continuous improvement).  

5.3.2. Team Development is a Journey, not a Destination 

Teams will move in and out of different levels of team functioning on their journey 
to being a high performing team. 

Provide  the  learner  with  a  context  for  understanding  that  teams  go  through 
cycles--moving  from  highly  collaborative  and  productive  to  less  productive  and 
less  collaborative--in  addition  to  their  developmental  stages.  This  is  a  natural 
process and needs to be reﬂected back to the team, not seen as a failure. 

5.3.3. Assessing the Team as a Healthy System 

Teams  will  develop  patterns  of  behavior  and  dynamics.  Assessing  a  team  in  a 
moment,  getting  a  snapshot  of  its  behavior  and  norms,  gives  the  Agile  Coach 
information to understand its health or non-health. 

Introduce one or more models for assessing healthy team functioning, especially 
the  ability  to  identify  clearly  dysfunctional  aspects.  Provide  suggestions  for 
awareness  of  environmental  elements  typically  outside  the  team's  control  (e.g., 
geographic  distribution,  teams  that  are  really  working  groups,  cultural 
misunderstanding). 

5.3.4. Adapt Your Style Based on Team Maturity 

Enhance the team’s self-sufﬁciency by consciously choosing your leadership range 
(i.e., leading from the front or leading from the back). 

Convey  the  importance  of  becoming  intentional  about  one's  leadership  approach 
based  on  the  team  maturity  and  Agile  maturity,  and  letting  the  level  of  direct 
involvement decrease as they mature and take on more themselves. 

5.4. HANDLING CONFLICT AND DYSFUNCTION WITHIN THE TEAM  

5.4.1. Surfacing and Working with Conﬂict 

Conﬂict  is  a  natural  part  of  a  team’s  development  and  learning  process  and  is 
essential to their creativity and quality of work. Fear of interpersonal conﬂict can 
be an impediment to building a high performing team. 

Highlight  the  importance  of  conﬂict  in  a  team  and  provide  the  learner  with  the 
ability  to  surface  conﬂict  in  a  positive  manner  to  improve  the  team’s  conﬂict 
competency.  When  conﬂict  competency  exists,  team  members  feel  more 

PAGE 

 13

LEARNING OUTCOMES

conﬁdent in their abilities to address conﬂict and hold one another accountable for 
their behavior and performance. 

5.4.2. Building Self-Awareness/Self-Management Capacity in the Team 

The  same  issues  of  self-awareness  and  self-management  apply  to  the  team  as 
well as to the Agile coach. 

Give the learner tools to use for both themselves and with their teams to increase 
the team’s capacity for both self-awareness and self- management.  

5.4.3. Creating Awareness that Teams are Human Systems 

Teams  are  human  systems  that  have  their  own  values,  perspectives, 
consciousness and truth. 

Expose  learners  to  the  idea  that  a  team  is  more  than  a  collection  of  individuals, 
that it is a human system with its own characteristics, needs and growth potential. 
Further,  show  that  moments  of  conﬂict  or  collaboration  difﬁculty  can  be  seen  as 
human systems dynamics, rather than solely personal to the individuals involved. 
The learner will be able to begin seeing the team as a human system by bringing 
their awareness to this level, at least some of the time.  

5.5. HANDLE ORGANIZATIONAL IMPEDIMENTS 

5.5.1. Identifying and Capturing Impediments 

The decision to adopt Agile at a team or organizational level will introduce varying 
types of change into the organization. 

Introduce  common  organizational  impediments  and  help  the  learner  be  able  to 
help teams recognize and capture the impediments affecting them. Agile practices 
do  not  necessarily  create  new  problems  but  they  have  a  way  of  surfacing 
dysfunctions  that  already  exist  within  an  organization.  Organization  impediments 
that  impact  the  team  may  be  such  things  as  organizational  structure,  physical 
layout,  hiring  practices,  career  paths,  training  and  development, 
ofﬁce 
compensation, rewards and recognition, leadership, etc. At this level, the purpose 
is  not  to  solve  these  organizational  challenges,  but  to  mitigate  their  impact  on  a 
speciﬁc team. 

5.5.2. Leadership Engagement 

Organizational 
limit  team  productivity  and  quality.  Some 
impediments can be resolved by the team, others may need to be solved at higher 
levels in the organization. 

impediments 

Provide the learner with the ability to know when and how to engage leadership in 
solving organizational impediments. 

6. SET BOUNDARIES FOR AGILE COACHING 

6.1. COACHING ALLIANCES AND CONTRACTS  

6.1.1. Deﬁning the Agile Coaching "Contract" 

PAGE 

 14

LEARNING OUTCOMES

When  they  begin  work  with  a  team  and  its  business  unit,  effective  Agile  coaches 
make agreements with key stakeholders (e.g., management, the team) on how the 
coaching  work  will  proceed. This  involves  those  directly  affected  (e.g.,  the  team) 
as well as those “paying for” or authorizing the coach’s services (e.g., management 
or sponsor). 

Convey the importance of a coaching contract, that it is not a “legal” contract but 
rather  an  agreement  between  the  parties.  How  to  negotiate  such  an  agreement, 
why it’s important to coaching success, how it helps bound what the coach agrees 
to  do  (e.g.,  start-up  and  run  a  new  Agile  team  for  three  months)  and  what  the 
coach  will  not  do  (e.g.,  give  performance  management  evaluations  for  team 
members),  as  well  as  what  the  “client”  will  do  (e.g.,  provide  training  for  the  team, 
make  a  candidate  Agile  Team  Facilitator  available  from  within  the  team)  are  all 
components  of  this  LO.  Effective  Agile  Coaches,  whether  they  are  internal 
employees  or  external  consultants,  see  their  work  similarly  to  that  of  a 
collaborative consultant (see for instance Peter Block, Flawless Consulting), which 
is why the coaching contract is an appropriate learning topic for all Agile Coaches. 

6.1.2. Designing a Coaching Alliance 

A coaching alliance is the other side of the coaching contract. Where the contract 
provides  the  conditions  for  the  work  (e.g.,  boundaries,  time,  roles),  the  coaching 
alliance empowers the Agile Coaching relationship. 

Introduce key elements of designing a coaching alliance including creating rapport, 
key  questions  to  ask,  tone  of  the  discussion  and  hoped-for  outcomes.  This  is  a 
two-way  conversation  wherein  the  parties  assert  what  they  need  to  create  a 
powerful  relationship,  and  negotiate  for  alignment.  It  answers  questions  such  as 
how  do  the  individuals  or  the  team  as  a  whole  want  to  be  coached?  How  would 
they like to receive feedback? How will the coach know when she has challenged 
the team “too far” or “not enough”? Will they help the coach get better at coaching 
them in the unique way they need to be coached? 

6.1.3.  Internal  vs.  External  Coaches:  Special  Considerations  for 

Contracting and Designing Alliances 

Internal  coaches  and  external  coaches  work  under  different  constraints. 
Understanding the power and limitations of their situation helps the coach create 
stronger coaching contracts and alliances. 

important  topics  to  bring 

Discuss  the  key  differences  between  internal  and  external  coaches,  identify  the 
unique  challenges  faced  by  internal  coaches  (e.g.,  maintaining  neutrality  and 
conﬁdentiality,  holding  people  accountable,  challenging  the  status  quo)  and  that 
these  are 
into  coaching/alliance  conversations. 
Familiarize the learner with the unique challenges of being an internal coach, and 
that  it  does  not  prevent  them  from  maintaining  the  coaching  stance  (e.g., 
maintaining  neutrality,  not  colluding,  supporting  the  client’s  agenda).  Familiarize 
the  learner  with  the  unique  challenges  of  being  an  external  coach,  such  as  the 
need  for  effective  systems  entry,  treating  the  client  system  with  respect  for  the 
choices it has made, balancing challenge with respecting the pace of change that 
can be assimilated, etc..

PAGE 

 15

LEARNING OUTCOMES

